---
layout: post
title: Free money!
permalink: /grants
---

Let's not mince words: For all that UC Berkeley is billed up to be the best public school in the country with all of its top graduate programs ([including MSE](https://www.usnews.com/best-graduate-schools/top-engineering-schools/material-engineering-rankings){:target="_blank"}), it is disappointing that not only is the graduate stipend often times insufficient to cover basic needs, but there are additional costs associated with the PhD that can definitely creep up on you. 🙄
Luckily, there are many grants available for **free money**, but it requires knowing where to look or who to talk to (to tell you where to look). 
Here are three funding opportunities that I encountered and obtained this school year. 🤑


## Conference Travel Grant

This is probably the most relevant one to you as you'll likely be traveling to conferences during the course of your PhD;
I've already received quite a few questions about this grant.
While conferences are great networking and dissemination opportunities, they can also be quite expensive!
There's a bunch of costs, including registration, transportation, hotel, food, etc. which adds up to be ~$1000. 💸
This is a relatively small amount compared to the size of a research grant, but maybe funding happens to be tight or you're self-funded (like me), so there isn't an applicable pot of money. 
Also doesn't hurt to save your advisor some money!

Fortunately, the Graduate Division sponsors the [**Conference Travel Grant**](https://grad.berkeley.edu/financial/options-for-financial-support/fellowships/){:target="_blank"} which can be a great subsidy.
The application is **really easy** and Mark has never heard of a student _not_ getting one if they applied.
The stipulations are:
- You can only receive **two** in the course of your PhD.
- You must have an accepted Poster or Presentation; you can't just go for professional development. (although this is important too!)
- $600 for a conference in CA; $900 for a conference in US; $1200 for an international conference.
- You cannot be in your final semester.

As you can see, there are basically no reasons not to apply.


## Berkeley Research Impact Initiative

This is another situation that might come up in your PhD.


## Course Improvement Grant

If you're super stoked about teaching like I am (and a few other MSE students!), you may have an idea for a mini-project that you'd like to do to improve a 
[Course Improvement Grant](https://gsi.berkeley.edu/programs-services/grants/course-improvement-grant/){:target="_blank"}

Some additional thoughts:
- A $300 cap really isn't that much money.
Our entire poster order was $900, and a Course Improvement Grant that I applied for to develop a coursereader at Stanford was $1200 (and I used it to directly pay me).
- The fact that you have to be a GSI to apply for this grant is also irksome. 
For example, when I wrote that coursereader, I did it purely as a hobby project.

